# Lithium batteries (LIB)

Anode: positive electrode
Cathode: negative electrode

During charging, an external electrical power source (the charging circuit)
applies an over-voltage (a higher voltage than the battery produces, of the
same polarity), forcing a charging current to flow within the battery from the
positive to the negative electrode, i.e. in the reverse direction of a
discharge current under normal conditions. The lithium ions then migrate from
the positive to the negative electrode, where they become embedded in the
porous electrode material in a process known as intercalation. (1)

Energy losses arising from electrical contact resistance at interfaces between
electrode layers and at contacts with current-collectors can be as high as 20%
of the entire energy flow of batteries under typical operating conditions. (1)

## Temperature impact on battery life

Charging temperature limits for Li-ion are stricter than the operating limits.
Lithium-ion chemistry performs well at elevated temperatures but **prolonged
exposure to heat reduces battery life** (1).

Li-ion batteries provide lightweight, high energy density power sources for a
variety of devices. To power larger devices, such as electric cars, connecting
many small batteries in a parallel circuit is more effective and more efficient
than connecting a single large battery. (1)

## Self discharge

Batteries gradually self-discharge even if not connected and delivering
current. Li+ rechargeable batteries have a self-discharge rate typically stated
by manufacturers to be 1.5-2% per month. (1)

## Degradation depends on temperature

Degradation is strongly temperature-dependent, with a minimal degradation
around 25 °C, i.e., increasing if stored or used at above or below 25 °C (1)

Relevant study: [Temperature dependent ageing mechanisms in Lithium-ion
batteries][temp-dependent]

## Fire hazard

They can catch fire because they contain flammable electrolyte.

Short-circuiting a battery will cause the cell to overheat and possibly to
catch fire. (1)

In the event of a fire, the device may emit dense irritating smoke.

## Damaging and overloading

If a lithium-ion battery is damaged, crushed, or is subjected to a higher
electrical load without having overcharge protection then problems may arise.

[To reduce risks] many lithium-ion cells (and battery packs) contain fail-safe
circuitry that disconnects the battery when its voltage is outside the safe
range of 3–4.2 V per cell. (1)

## Sources

1. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithium-ion\_battery>

[temp-dependent]:
https://sci-hub.se/https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0378775314004352?via%3Dihub
